---
layout: wrapper
title: Conclusion
permalink: /conclusion/
---

<hr>
<br>
<div>
    <h3>Conclusion</h3>
    <p>Initially we found that recent data suggests bird populations in North America have seen a loss of more than 1 in 4 birds since 1970 or approximately 2.9 billion birds, which is alarming. Our introductory visualizations highlighted similar trends for the majority of the seven bird species we have chosen to focus on, excluding the canada goose, the wood duck, and gray catbird. Overall we found that while banding events is not directly comparable to bird population numbers, they overall show a good picture of the temporal changes happening. It is likely some "noise" is present in our dataset that skew it slightly, such as less clear guidelines at the beginning of the efforts. For the geographical data, it likewise gave a good insight into where each bird primarily reside, though it should be noted there may be some bias due to this dataset being collected by a U.S. governemnt body which means data within the US was their primary source of information. Finally, the temporal ganges highlighted the efforts to stabilize efforts of conservation and data collection and how bird banding has become a much more consistent practice over time. Thus, it is unlikely that the downward trend we are seeing in population numbers is simply due to something like neglience of data collection and analysis.</p>
    <p>Across our seven focus species, only the canada goose and the wood duck have been seeing increases over the last couple of decades, however, not without its oddities. The canada goose has, for lack of a better term, seen an exploding increasing of 101% per decade, which in conjunction with the steep decline of many other species is unusual. The wood duck, on the other hand, has followed a more modest increase, largely due to conservation efforts such as instating bird boxes. The gray catbird, on the other hand, appears to overall be steady in its population numbers and we were unable to find any sources that may suggest the species is endangered in any way. The remaining 4 species, the american goldfinch, mourning dove, tree swallow, and white-throated sparrow, have all seen considerable declines over the decades, some, such as the mournign dove and tree swallow, to alarming levels. Despite them not being considered endangered due to their still relatively high numbers, as they are quite common species, such trends should not be taken likely. If we are to first take action when they are classified as such, then it is likely too late, something which the endangerment and subsequent extinction of various animal species throughout time is a testament to. As several experts say, some of the major factors causing these declines is climate change, urbanization, and agrigultural expansion. While we on a personal can do many things to try to lessen thise, such as making our windows safe for birds and keeping cats indoors, changes on a larger, governmental/global level is required, especially regarding climate change. One such thing could be ensuring the population of insects remain high and consistent despite climate changes happening, something requires more research.</p>
    <p>As global warming continues to alter the planet’s climate, fewer and fewer birds feel the instinctual urge to migrate. Yet, despite this trend, a significant number of them still embark on the challenging journey every spring and fall, traversing thousands of kilometers. These migratory birds follow established flyways, routes that have been passed down through generations and are carefully chosen for their abundant food sources and ideal resting spots along the way.</p>
    <p>Migration, though vital, is never without its obstacles. It is a journey fraught with uncertainty, where birds face numerous risks—ranging from unpredictable weather patterns to the exhaustion of long-distance travel. In spring, the competition intensifies as birds rush to arrive first at their breeding grounds, eager to secure the best territories for raising their young. This race is crucial, as the first arrivals gain the upper hand in claiming prime nesting spots.</p>
    <p>Interestingly, climate change is influencing the timing of these migrations. Birds are now setting off earlier in the season, adjusting their schedules to the shifting environmental cues. Despite this shift in timing, however, the fundamental behaviors and patterns of migration remain largely unchanged. The pull to migrate, driven by ancient instincts, persists, as does the desire to reach the breeding grounds in time to secure the best possible start to the season.</p>
</div>



